# A still debated question: At what time did 25 Northumberland Road fall?



|  |
| --- |
|  |
| Northumberland Road occupied by British troops after the battle. © University College Dublin 
 |

As the first point of confrontation, 25 Northumberland Road was the first house
to fall to the British. The time that the British captured the house is key to
establishing a timeline for the entirety of the battle. Until this day,
researchers debate the time the building was captured owing conflicting
accounts. Seamus Grace, in his Bureau of Military History statement given in
1949, estimated that the building was stormed at 10:00 on Wednesday night.
Meanwhile, the regimental history of the 2/7th battalion estimates the
building’s capture to have taken place after 2:45 pm. It is likely that Grace’s
estimation is ‘unrealistically late’ as Hughes et al. (2017) note. Grace’s
estimation would unrealistically push back the sequence of events within the
battle that continued after the fall of 25 Northumberland Road and contradicts
witness statements about the other occupied buildings.

Clanwilliam House was the last Irish-occupied building to fall at Mount Street.
Joseph O’Conner was an Irish volunteer of the 3rd brigade who described in his
1948 Bureau Statement how he fought at the nearby Lansdowne Road. According to
him, Clanwilliam House was burning at 8:00 in the evening. Seamus Kavanagh,
another Irish volunteer who was stationed at Roberts’ Builders Yard, described
in his 1949 Bureau Statement that Clanwilliam House was ‘engulfed in flames’ by
8:30 pm. These accounts pinpointing the fall of Clanwilliam House at around 8:00
in the evening contradict Grace’s account of 25 Northumberland Road falling at
around 10:00 pm. Considering that 25 Northumberland Road was the first building
to fall and Clanwilliam House the last, Grace’s estimation is likely too late
due to its implications for the larger sequence of events.

(MAI, BMH WS 310; 1/7th, 2/7th, 3/7th Sherwood Foresters; MAI, BMH WS 157; MAI,
BMH WS 208; Hughes et al., 2017)

